This is the mic right? So I've, I wrote down some thoughts so don't please don't be worried, this is not a long speech, it's just a very large font. And uh, so, and I just want to say, this is not in the speech, uh, I was sitting over there and I was looking back most of the time at the Sea of beautiful faces and I was just thinking to myself: your faces are so beautiful not only because you're so young and have such amazing hair, and not only because you're accomplished enough to be taking leading algebra so early in your college careers, but also because you're in Gill's presence, and when you're in Gill's presence you're just in the better, more beautiful world, and I think that your faces are channeling that. So it's that's just uh what it's like knowing Gill, and I think that's why I chose to pursue the same line of studies as Gill, and it has, Gill's presence in my life has informed so many of my decisions. So anyway, so that's just some thoughts that I had. 

Now I'll get to my speech and uh first I want to say congratulations Gil on your retirement. Uh, thank you. Now you will finally have some time to concentrate on your research, and uh, and we and we all owe you a debt of gratitude for everything you've done, but my life especially uh has been touched by you. So all I want to do is just share a few of my personal experiences. So if I think back to one of the most important days in my life, it was the day that I passed my call, and it wasn't because I passed my call, it's because when you said "congratulations" and I said "Thank You Professor Strang," you said "I think that going forward Gil is more appropriate," yeah. And in that moment I felt like I've made it. And uh, and I to this day I look back on that day as the day that I've made it, that's just how much it means to me to be on the first name basis with you. 

And speaking of your name, uh, I have to confess that I name drop your name all the time. Uh, so for example if somebody asks me for linear algebra textbook recommendation, I say, "well I might be biased because he was my advisor, but I recommend Strang's book." And I understand it takes away from the recommendation a little bit, but that's just how proud I am to be, to be your student. Now this is very personal, I want to say a few words about your office. When I'm in your office, to me it's like an oasis of peace, and I feel like the zero-sum world is left at the door and that only good things can happen while I'm there. That and I just still remember sitting in front of your desk and the stacks of papers and books, it looks like the late stages of the game Jenga and I feel like they might be about to fall, but I still feel like all is right with the world and it's just my, one of the most comfortable places to be. And today when I know that my son is outside playing soccer and I hear the sound of shattering glass, uh, I close my eyes, I take, take a deep breath and I go to my good place which is your office. That's, that's the safe place, uh, that's the safe place in me. 

So uh, you've been, Alan was saying uh something to that effect, but you've been a role model uh in my, in all aspects of my life. You've taught me a lot of things. You've, you've taught me, you've shown me how to give without thinking about taking. Uh, you taught me how to always find a positive way when you need to say something, and how it's especially important to find a positive way to answer a question that wasn't necessarily asked in a positive way. Um, you taught me a lot about always remembering about what matters. I remember I was lamenting to you how my videos, how other math videos on YouTube get thousands of times more views than my videos, and you said, "views yes, but but how many memories?" And uh, and I just want to say that you guys are so lucky because you will remember this class and you will remember this experience and you will have these memories. And thanks for teaching me that it's the memories that count and not the views, and I never thought about views again after that conversation. 

Now, you also, what I really appreciate is that you're always forthcoming with advice when it's badly needed, and I'll just relate one story. Uh, when you were over at our house for dinner and you learn that my kitchen had been under construction for a year and making very slow progress, you look me straight in the eye and said, uh, "Pavel, your family needs a kitchen." And a month later my kitchen was completed and I needed to hear that. And uh, this is the mildest of all examples when you recognize that a, I needed input from you and and you gave it, so I, I'm thankful for that very much, and uh, and my wife thanks you too. 

I just have two more things to say. So a few years ago you came to Drexel and gave a talk at the math colloquium and you said, "I'm about to use two words that I may have never used in the talk before," and those words were "theorem" and "proof," which is quite remarkable for a mathematician. And I think we all appreciate how you keep things unsophisticated. Just, just look at this board: clear, clear, and clear and simple. And uh, for a guy who only talks about matrices, uh, it's amazing that you are, as I see it, one of the most universal mathematicians, and you have taught us that a simple three by three Matrix can give us scientific uh insight. And before you, Matrix was a dirty word, and now I think we would all be proud to have a beautiful Matrix with special properties at the center of any of our papers. And I think that mathematicians used to look down on linear algebra, but you were right all along about how important the subject is, and now I think ChatGPT and the linear algebra behind it looks down on us, so, so you had it right. So uh, we're all very excited to see what you'll accomplish in your retirement, but I'm sure that whatever it is, uh, you will remember it not just for your scientific accomplishments but for human decency. And uh, I might be biased because I was your student, but I think you're the best, so thank you. Thanks.

Thank you, I think that was really great. Let me uh say a quick, a few quick runs since it's almost the end of the year. So I'm Michel Goemans and I um, I'm the head of the math department, and uh Gil's career at MIT has just been extraordinary. As, as he said, he has been for 61 years on the um, on the faculty in mathematics, and that's actually more than any other faculty member in the history of the department, and possibly of the history of, and and possibly even in the history of MIT, but I, I didn't, I I couldn't check that. Um, and and as he said, the his affiliation with MIT has been even longer since he was a math major um from 1952 to 1955 and a Moore instructor from 59 to 61. Mathematics, as you know, is everyone in engineering and science, and in that spirit, Gil's mission has been to educate countless of students from everyone on the planet in linear algebra, calculus, differential equations, and more generally Applied Mathematics and and computational science. 

Um, I say everyone on the planet, and in fact at the beginning of this lecture I was checking on YouTube and I saw comments from people in Kazakhstan, Turkey, Russia, Mongolia, Iran, Brazil, Thailand, India, South Korea, Nigeria, Germany, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Bangladesh, Philippines, Morocco, Greece, Italy, China, Taiwan, Brazil, Armenia, Indonesia, Croatia, Egypt, and even my home country of Belgium. Legendary. Um, it's not a surprise that 450 students registered from 18.06 from the last term he was teaching together with Andrew Horning. Um, but students well beyond the walls of, of these, of MIT have benefited from his classes. Um, he was the, the first um to put lectures on OCW and as it started, and um, has had um, his, his courses on, his many courses on OCW attract about 5,000 daily visits. Uh, that's pretty uh significant, and um, and his videos apparently have been seen by more than 14 million people. That's quite uh remarkable, and as part of his educational mission, he has published over 13 books. Um, if I got the number right, because it seems that every week there is almost a new one. 

His, his impact on mathematics has been um, and especially on math education has been uh mind-boggling. So I taught 18.06 many years ago, and before teaching I attended Gil's lectures just to see his uh, his way of teaching, and his pedagogical style is indeed really unique. Um, I felt he's really good at making students think and feel like they discover the concepts by themselves, and if he seems sometimes lost in front of the blackboards, I quickly realized it's just pretense, he, he knows exactly what uh what he's talking about. Um, and um, I should say also that as department head, I often meet alumni, MIT alumni from other disciplines, and quite often they say, "oh I have this memorable class at MIT, the name was uh Gil Strang," and then they say, "oh he must be retiring by now, decades ago," and I say, "no, no, he's still, he's still here." But finally I'll be able to say, "yes, he has retired uh now." I'm sorry to hear that. 

So um, I've been uh in this department for half of his tenure and he has been an amazingly pleasant colleague, he is so humble. And so after 61 years at The Institute, um, we'll miss him and his teaching, but I think he fully deserves retirement. So please join me in congratulating Gil for his lifelong dedication to mathematics and its education and MIT. Thank you.

Thank you all, it's, it's, this is really an unforgettable day for me. Thank you, and thank you Michel. Good, very good. So, and he, so he believes I'm going to retire? I'm going to think about it. So thank you all. Empty the classroom. Thank you.